3. LEAVE AND TRAVEL RULES   
3.1 Leave rules for teaching staff   
All leave letters should be forwarded with recommendation through the 
reporting officers: HOD/ Director/Dean/VC.  
3.1.1 Casual Leave (CL)  
a. Total casual leave granted to a teacher shall not exceed fifteen days in 
an academic year.  
b. Casual leave cannot be combined with any other kind of leave except 
duty leave and intervening holidays, if any.    
c. Casual leave as far as possible must be pre-informed and needs prior 
approval.  In case of exigencies post-facto approval may be obtained 
immediately on reporting, on the same day or latest by the next 
working day.  
d. Not more than 3 days of casual leave shall be normally permitted in a 
month.  Extended casual leave up to a maximum of 6 days may be 
permitted in case of exigencies and based on the leave habits at the 
discretion of the management.   
e. A maximum of two restricted holidays (RH), as announced by the 
state government where the campus of the faculty is located, in 
addition to the casual leave may be availed in a year, with prior 
approval by the University.  RH leave is permitted only to those who 
are likely to celebrate the important festivities.  
f. 
No leave shall normally be entertained during examination/evaluation 
period.  The Dean is authorized to consider the applications for leave 
during the Mid-Semester Examination (MSE). Leave during the End 
Semester Examination (ESE) needs the approval of the Registrar.   
g. Failure to register entry/exit or absence without leave approval will be 
treated as “Unauthorised absence” and is liable for salary/leave cut 
and disciplinary action.  Check “View My Attendance” in Knowledge 
Pro (KP) regularly and immediately submit the leave form, in case of 
any “Absent” entry.  
h. Exemption for not registering the entry/exit is permissible only when 
the Faculty/Staff is authorized, in the specified format, for such an 
exemption by a competent authority of the University.  Application 
21  
CHRIST   
for exemption should be preferably submitted well in advance or 
immediately on reporting back, after the exemption period.  
i. 
Late entry can be registered, within 30 minutes after the check-in
time, only at the dedicated machines.  Habitual late entry (more than 4 
instances in a month) will lead to cut in salary (cut for 3 instances) or 
disciplinary action as per University rules.  There is no provision for 
registering early exit.   
3.1.2 Accumulated Leave (ACL)  
a. Up to a maximum of 5 days unutilized leave out of the 15 days 
Casual Leave per year may be accumulated and used in 
subsequent years for special reasons like hospitalization, 
marriage, research and the like.    
b. The maximum leave accumulated at any time will be limited to 40 
days.    
c. ACL approved and availed in one or more occasions together in 
an academic year shall not exceed 20 days.   
d. ACL must be pre-informed and needs prior approval.  In case of 
exigencies approval may be obtained within three days of 
absence.  
e. Intervening holidays, if any, will be included for considering the 
leave.  
3.1.3 Special Casual Leave (SCL)  
a. Special Casual Leave, not exceeding eight days in an academic year, 
may be granted at the instance of the faculty member.  
a. To attend workshops, conferences, symposia and seminars  
b. To attend examinations/tests or training programmes, including 
MPhil/PhD  
c. Personal consultancy, if approved by the University  
d. Orientation, Refresher and Training programmes approved by the 
University  
b. Special Casual Leave must be preferably pre-authorized, at least three 
days in advance.    
STAFF HANDBOOK   
22 
c. Submit leave application in advance along with registration/invitation 
documents or participation certificate immediately after the 
programme.  
d. Special Casual Leave cannot be accumulated.   
e. The teachers have to make their own arrangements to engage extra 
classes to make up for the loss in working days.  
3.1.4 Duty Leave (OOD)  
Duty leave is granted at the instance of the University:   
a. To conduct examination of a University/Public Service 
Commission/Board of Examination or other similar 
bodies/institutions 
b. To inspect academic institutions attached to a statutory board, 
including BOS and Academic Council, with the approval of the 
University   
c. To deliver lectures in institutions and universities at the invitation 
received by the University, and accepted by the Vice Chancellor 
d. To work in another University, any other institution or organization, 
when so deputed by the University.  
e. Participating in a delegation or working on a committee appointed by 
the Government of India, State Government, University Grants 
Commission, a sister institution or any academic body. 
f. 
For performing any other duty for or on behalf of the 
University/Department  
g. No duty leave would be permitted for doing freelance services, unless 
it is based on an official enquiry and the teacher is deputed for the 
purpose by the University  
h. Application for duty leave, supported by relevant documents 
(nomination/appointment), must be made at least 3 days in advance 
duly recommended by the HOD  
3.1.5 Maternity Leave (ML)  
a. Maternity leave on full pay may be granted for a period not exceeding 
90 days to confirmed women teachers.  
b. No maternity leave in the year of appointment/during contract period.  
c. Maternity leave on 50% pay during probation.    
23  
CHRIST   
d. Maternity leave must be pre-authorized, one month in advance.    
e. Application for leave must be supported by a medical certificate.  
f. 
If a faculty/staff fails to report or seeks extension of leave for more 
than 3 months and/or resigns from service on expiry of the maternity 
leave, the maternity benefit availed shall be refundable unless 
otherwise approved by the University.   
3.1.6 Extraordinary leave (EOL)  
a. Absence without leave entitlement shall be on extraordinary leave on 
loss of pay and shall need prior approval of the Dean/Director and the 
Registrar.  
b. Loss of pay leave may be granted only under exceptional 
circumstances, for reasons approved by the University.  
c. For very special reasons extra-ordinary leave for a limited period may 
be granted with pay, at the discretion of the University and based on 
the leave habits of the faculty/staff.  However, such leave approved in 
one or more occasions together in an academic year shall not exceed 
21 calendar days. In cases of prolonged medical treatment leave 
with/without pay may be granted as per the policy and discretion of 
the management  
d. Clearance of dues in the prescribed format should be submitted in 
case of extended leave and rejoining after such leave will be as per 
section 5.6.  
e. Extraordinary leave with pay need the prior approval of the Vice 
Chancellor/Chief Finance Officer.  The faculty shall submit the 
approval letter along with the application for leave.  
f. 
If an employee absents himself/herself from duty without prior 
approval or leave sanction for more than 21 consecutive days, he/she 
shall be presumed to have left the services of the University on his/her 
own accord without notice and his/her name shall accordingly, be 
struck off from the rolls of the University.  
3.1.7 Vacation rules  
a. Vacation facility is available only for academic faculty members.    
b. The formal vacation period shall be restricted to 21 days every year 
after completion of the valuation of the answer sheets of the End 
STAFF HANDBOOK   
24 
Semester Examination of the Even Semester or End Trimester 
Examination of the third trimester.    
c. Vacation dates will be as notified by the Registrar each year.  
d. Any other non-class days occurring prior to or after Mid Semester 
Examination or the period of study holidays shall remain working 
days for the faculty unless otherwise notified as holiday by the 
University.  
e. No vacation facility will be available to non-teaching staff (laboratory 
and administrative staff) engaged in academic departments.    
f. 
Academic faculty deputed to non-vacation departments/centres and 
Deans/Directors shall avail the vacation leave for a maximum of 30 
days in a year during the vacation period, without affecting the 
functioning of the department/centre.  
g. In general no leave is permitted on either side of vacation period.  
3.2 Leave rules for non-teaching staff  
3.2.1 Casual Leave  
(Same as for teaching staff)  
3.2.2 Duty Leave  
(Same as for teaching staff)  
3.2.3 Maternity Leave   
(Same as for teaching staff)  
3.2.4 Extra-ordinary Leave  
(Same as for teaching staff)  
3.2.5 Accumulated Leave   
(Same as for teaching staff)  
3.2.6 Special Leave (SL)  
a. Special leave for specific purposes for a certain period, during lean 
days, may be granted to the resident staff, at the discretion of the 
University and based on the leave habits of the Staff.  
25  
CHRIST   
b. Non-teaching/Non-vacation staff members are eligible for five days of 
special leave per year.  
c. Special leave is to be utilized during lean days and must be pre
informed and needs prior approval.  
d. The unutilized special leave may be accumulated and used in 
subsequent years  
e. The maximum special leave accumulated at any time will be limited 
to 40 days.    
f. 
Special leave availed in one or more occasions together in an 
academic year shall not exceed 20 days.   
g. Intervening holidays, if any, will be included for considering the 
leave.  
h. Extraordinary leave with pay for residential staff (Security, Hostel 
warden) to visit their native place 15 days in a year or one month once 
in two years, excluding normal CL and SL applicable to nonteaching 
staff.  
3.3 Travel Rules and Regulations  
Traveling for official purposes by the University Staff shall be governed by 
the following rules.  Traveling for the purpose of these rules means any 
movement outside Bengaluru (Place of posting) involving overnight stay.  
• No travel shall be permitted unless authorized by the approving 
authority, in the prescribed format.  
• The mode of travel and the limits on permissible expense during 
the travel shall be as per University rules.  
• Timing and duration of travel shall depend on the exigencies 
though however no teaching faculty shall as far as possible plan 
their travel during the beginning and end months of a semester 
and shall ensure that not more than 6 class hours are lost due to 
travel related absence.  
• Within a week of completion of every travel, a Travel Report and 
a Traveling Expense Statement must be submitted in the 
prescribed format.    
• Traveling expense statement must be approved by the travel 
approving authority and the Chief Finance Officer.  
STAFF HANDBOOK   
26 
• Expenses for local conveyance on travel shall be permitted on 
actual basis.  Any expense claimed in this regard in excess of  
₹200/- must be supported by receipt.  
• Approval of the Vice Chancellor shall be required for any foreign 
travel.  Travel must be by Economy Class Air and limits of total 
expenses per day including accommodation shall be as per 
University Rules.  
• Vice Chancellor may authorize higher expense limit on case-to
case basis in exceptional circumstances for domestic as well as 
foreign travels.  
• In case two members of staff travel together, the approving 
authority may approve the higher limit of eligibility for both the 
persons, if deemed necessary in the interest of the University.   
3.4 Medical Leave  
Confirmed employees with continuous service of less than 10 years can 
avail medical leave of maximum six months (180 days) and those with 
service 10 years or more will be eligible for maximum 12 months (360 
days) of medical leave computed at the rate of 20 days for every completed 
year of service.  Medical leave shall be availed in cases of hospitalization 
and prolonged medical treatment. The medical leave may be approved with 
pay or with half pay or without pay as per rules and at the discretion of the 
management.  
27  
CHRIST   